Add new metric APIs (#25312)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/metrics-collection.md

---
title: Collect metrics - .NET
description: Tutorial to collect metrics in .NET applications
ms.topic: tutorial

> ms.date: 10/27you/2021

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ms.date: 10/27/2021
```

Author: that is interesting, not sure how that got there : )

---

# Collect metrics

> **This article applies to: ✔️** .NET Core 3.1 and later versions **✔️** .NET Framework 4.5 and later versions

Reviewer 2: >NET Framework 4.5  [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=73&length=18)

4.6.1

Instrumented code can record numeric measurements, but the measurements usually need to be aggregated, transmitted,
and stored to create useful metrics for monitoring. This process of aggregating, transmitting and storing the data is
called collection. In this tutorial, we will show several examples on how to collect metrics:
  - Populating metrics in Grafana with OpenTelemetry and Prometheus
  - Viewing metrics in real-time with the dotnet-counters command-line tool
  - Creating a custom collection tool using the underlying .NET <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> API

For more information on custom metric instrumentation see [here](./understanding-different-metric-apis.md) for an overview
of instrumentation options.

### Create an example application

**Prerequisites**: [.NET Core 3.1 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet) or a later version

Before metrics can be collected, we need to produce some measurements. For simplicity we will create a small app that has

> some trivial metric instrumentation. The .NET runtime also has [a variety of metrics of built-in](available-counters.md). See 

Reviewer 2: >available-counters.md [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=98&length=21)

does this file already exist?

Author: yeah it does

```dotnetcli
dotnet new console
dotnet add package System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource
```

Replace the code of Program.cs with:
```C#
using System;
using System.Diagnostics.Metrics;
using System.Threading;

class Program
{
    static Meter s_meter = new Meter("HatCo.HatStore", "1.0.0");
    static Counter<int> s_hatsSold = s_meter.CreateCounter<int>("hats-sold"); 

    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        Console.WriteLine("Press any key to exit");
        while(!Console.KeyAvailable)
        {
            // Pretend our store has a transaction each second that sells 4 hats
            Thread.Sleep(1000);
            s_hatsSold.Add(4);
        }
    }
}
```

### Viewing metrics with dotnet-counters

[dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) is a simple command-line tool that can view live metrics for any .NET Core application on
demand. It doesn't require any advance setup which can make it very useful for ad-hoc investigations or to verify that metric
instrumentation is working correctly. It works with both <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics?displayProperty=nameWithType> based
APIs as well as [EventCounters](event-counters.md).

> If the [dotnet-counters](./dotnet-counters.md) tool is not already installed use the SDK to install it:

Reviewer 2: >./ [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=25&length=2)

nit: why using `./` here? you didn't use it with the links.

Author: I haven't been consistent. My understanding is that both forms work and I think without the './' is more common elsewhere so I am converging on that.

Reviewer: In OSS projects I've seen more `./` usage (e.g. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/README.md).

I guess this was coming from the Linux shell habit - `./a.out foo bar` would run but `a.out foo bar` would not.

```dotnetcli

> > dotnet tool update -g dotnet-counters

Reviewer 2: >dotnet tool update -g dotnet-counters [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=2&length=37)

just checking, if anyone using .NET Core 3.1 and run this command, still can get the latest version of the tool. is that right?

Author: Yep, I did all the testing with only the 3.1 SDK + runtime installed to confirm no later dependencies crept in:

```
> dotnet --info
.NET Core SDK (reflecting any global.json):
 Version:   3.1.414
 Commit:    88a3b0c5ca

Runtime Environment:
 OS Name:     Windows
 OS Version:  10.0.19043
 OS Platform: Windows
 RID:         win10-x64
 Base Path:   C:\Program Files\dotnet\sdk\3.1.414\

Host (useful for support):
  Version: 3.1.20
  Commit:  2833dab8c3

.NET Core SDKs installed:
  3.1.414 [C:\Program Files\dotnet\sdk]

.NET Core runtimes installed:
  Microsoft.AspNetCore.App 3.1.20 [C:\Program Files\dotnet\shared\Microsoft.AspNetCore.App]
  Microsoft.NETCore.App 3.1.20 [C:\Program Files\dotnet\shared\Microsoft.NETCore.App]
  Microsoft.WindowsDesktop.App 3.1.20 [C:\Program Files\dotnet\shared\Microsoft.WindowsDesktop.App]

> dotnet tool uninstall dotnet-counters -g
Tool 'dotnet-counters' (version '5.0.251802') was successfully uninstalled.

> dotnet tool update -g dotnet-counters
You can invoke the tool using the following command: dotnet-counters
Tool 'dotnet-counters' (version '5.0.251802') was successfully installed.
```

> You can invoke the tool using the following command: dotnet-counters

Reviewer: I guess this line is intended to be outside a code block, currently it seems to be inside a code block by accident?

Author: That text "You can invoke the tool using the following command: dotnet-counters" is what is printed on the command-line output when you run the command so I think it is formatted correctly. Let me know if I misunderstand.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6243776/140670262-32793268-0c71-4738-b2ce-e3f51186f729.png)

Reviewer: Please resolve this comment (I don't seem to have permission to do that).

Tool 'dotnet-counters' (version '5.0.251802') was successfully installed.
```

While the sample app above is still running, list the running processes in a 2nd shell to determine the process ID:

```dotnetcli
> dotnet-counters ps
     10180 dotnet     C:\Program Files\dotnet\dotnet.exe
     19964 metric-instr E:\temp\metric-instr\bin\Debug\netcoreapp3.1\metric-instr.exe
```

Find the ID for the process name that matches the sample app and have dotnet-counters monitor all metrics from the

> "HatCo.HatStore" Meter.

Reviewer 2: >"HatCo.HatStore" [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=0&length=16)

should you mentioned the meter name is case sensitive? or dotnet-counter tool handle that?

Author: It is a case-sensitive comparison. I added a note in the text to call this out.

more about metrics that are available out of the box in .NET.

### Viewing metrics in Grafana with OpenTelemetry and Prometheus

#### Prerequisites

- [.NET Core 3.1 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet) or a later version

#### Overview

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is a vendor-neutral open-source project supported by the
[Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/) that aims to standardize generating and collecting telemetry for
cloud-native software. The .NET team has designed our built-in platform metric APIs to be compatible with this
standard to make integration straightforward for any .NET developers that wish to use it. At the time of writing support for
OpenTelemetry metrics is relatively new but [Azure Monitor](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-monitor/app/opentelemetry-overview)
and many major APM vendors have endorsed it and have integration plans underway.

This example shows one of the integrations available now for OpenTelemetry metrics using the very popular OSS 
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) projects. The metrics data will flow like this:

> 1. The .NET metric APIs collect measurements from our sample application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The .NET metric APIs collect measurements from our sample application.
```

> 2. The OpenTelemetry library running inside the same process aggregates these measurements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The OpenTelemetry library running inside the same process aggregates these measurements.
```

3. The Prometheus exporter library makes the aggregated data available via an HTTP
metrics endpoint. 'Exporter' is what OpenTelemetry calls the libraries that transmit

> telemetry to vendor-specific services.

Reviewer: "backends" might be a better term https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/16da729707e02e83f3a1b25b4faa3094c3f9e29b/specification/library-guidelines.md#sdk-implementation

```suggestion
telemetry to vendor-specific backends.
```

> 4. A Prometheus service, potentially running on a different machine, polls the

Reviewer: Consider align with the Prometheus term and have a link:

https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/first_steps/

"A Prometheus server, potentially running on a different machine, collects the metrics by scraping the metrics endpoint, reads the data ..."

Author: I put both the polling and scraping terminology now. Hopefully this is understandable for developers regardless whether they are experienced with Prometheus or not.

Reviewer: Makes sense, thanks!

metrics endpoint, reads the data and stores it in a database for long-term persistence.
5. The Grafana service, potentially running on a different machine, queries the data
stored in Prometheus and displays it to engineers on a web-based monitoring dashboard.

#### Configure the sample application to use OpenTelemetry's Prometheus exporter

1. Add a reference to the OpenTelemetry Prometheus exporter to the sample application:

```dotnetcli

> dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Prometheus --version 1.2.0-beta1

Reviewer 2: >--version 1.2.0-beta1 [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=53&length=21)

I am not sure if it is worth it to mention can use `--prerelease` instead if using .NET 5.0 SDK?

Author: Given that the OpenTelemetry crew might make breaking changes between pre-release builds it is probably safer to pin the exact version rather than allowing it to float via --prerelease. Once an RTM version is available I'd love to remove the '--version' from the docs entirely.

I did go ahead and add a warning that this is pre-release functionality, that breaking changes are possible, and that we only tested with this exact version.

```
> [!NOTE]
> The Promethus exporter library includes a reference to OpenTelemetry's shared library so this command implicitly adds both libraries
> to the application.

> 2. Modify the code of Program.cs so that it contains the extra code to configure OpenTelemetry at the beginning of Main():

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Modify the code of `Program.cs` so that it contains the extra code to configure OpenTelemetry at the beginning of Main():
```

```C#
using System;
using System.Diagnostics.Metrics;
using System.Threading;
using OpenTelemetry;
using OpenTelemetry.Metrics;

class Program
{
    static Meter s_meter = new Meter("HatCo.HatStore", "1.0.0");
    static Counter<int> s_hatsSold = s_meter.CreateCounter<int>(name: "hats-sold", 
                                                                unit: "Hats",
                                                                description: "The number of hats sold in our store"); 

    static void Main(string[] args)
    {

>         using var meterProvider = Sdk.CreateMeterProviderBuilder()

Reviewer 2: >var [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=14&length=3)

would be better to use the actual type here instead of var.

            Thread.Sleep(1000);
            s_hatsSold.Add(4);
        }
    }
}
```

`AddMeter("HatCo.HatStore")` configures OpenTelemetry to transmit all the metrics collected by the Meter our app defined.
`AddPrometheusExporter(...)` configures OpenTelemetry to expose Prometheus' metrics endpoint on port 9184 and to use
the HttpListener. See the [OpenTelemetry documentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Prometheus)
for more information about OpenTelemetry configuration options, in particular alternate hosting options that are useful for ASP.NET applications.

> [!NOTE]
> At the time of writing OpenTelemetry only supports metrics emitted using the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics?displayProperty=nameWithType>
> APIs however support for [EventCounters](event-counters.md) is planned.

3. Run the sample app and leave it running in the background.

```dotnetcli
> dotnet run
Press any key to exit
```

#### Setup and Configure Prometheus

1. Follow the [Prometheus first steps](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/first_steps/) to set up your Prometheus server
and confirm it is working.

> 2. Modify the prometheus.yml configuration file so that Prometheus will scrape the metrics endpoint that our example app is

Reviewer: I noticed that we have both "example" and "sample" used, I suggest that we use "example" (sample/sampling/sampler have special meaning in the overall telemetry space).

exposing. Add this text in the scrape_configs section:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

  - job_name: 'OpenTelemetryTest'
    static_configs:
    - targets: ['localhost:9184']
```

If you are starting from the default configuration then scrape_configs should now look like this:

```
scrape_configs:
  # The job name is added as a label `job=<job_name>` to any timeseries scraped from this config.
  - job_name: "prometheus"

    # metrics_path defaults to '/metrics'
    # scheme defaults to 'http'.

    static_configs:
      - targets: ["localhost:9090"]

  - job_name: 'OpenTelemetryTest'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9184']
```

> Reload the configuration or restart the prometheus server, then confirm that OpenTelemetryTest is in the UP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reload the configuration or restart the Prometheus server, then confirm that OpenTelemetryTest is in the UP
```

state in the Status->Targets page of the Prometheus web portal.

3. On the Graph page of the Prometheus web portal enter `hats_sold` in the expression text box. In the graph tab Prometheus should
show the steadily increasing value of the "hats-sold" Counter that is being emitted by our sample application.
[hats-sold-graph](media\prometheus-hat-sold-metric.png)

If the Prometheus server hasn't been scraping (Prometheus' terminology for polling) the sample app for long you may need to wait a short

> while for data to accumulate. The default configuration has Prometheus scrape metric data every 15 seconds.

Reviewer: I suggest putting an explicit scraping period in the configuration file (e.g. 1 second) for better demo/learning experience.

#### Showing metrics on a Grafana dashboard

1. Follow [the standard instructions](https://prometheus.io/docs/visualization/grafana/#creating-a-prometheus-graph) to install Grafana and
connect it to a Prometheus data source.

> 2. Create a Grafana dashboard by clicking the + icon on the left toolbar in the Grafana web portal, then select 'Dashboard'. In dashboard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create a Grafana dashboard by clicking the "+" icon on the left toolbar in the Grafana web portal, then select 'Dashboard'. In dashboard
```

editor that appears enter 'Hats Sold/Sec' as the Title and 'rate(hats_sold[5m])' in the PromQL expression field. It should look like this:
[hats-sold-dashboard-editor](media\grafana-hats-sold-dashboard-editor.png)

3. Click Apply to save and view our simple new dashboard.

> [hats-sold-dashboard](media\grafana-hats-sold-dashboard)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[hats-sold-dashboard](media\grafana-hats-sold-dashboard.png)
```

> 

Reviewer: nit: remove the extra white line.

### Creating a custom collection tool using the .NET <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> API

The .NET <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> API allows creating custom in-process logic to observe the measurements
being recorded by <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.Meter?displayProperty=nameWithType>. For guidance creating custom
logic compatible with the older EventCounters instrumentation see [here](event-counters.md).

> Modify the code of Program.cs to use the MeterListener like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modify the code of `Program.cs` to use `MeterListener` like this:
```

```C#
using System;
using System.Collections.Generic;
using System.Diagnostics.Metrics;
using System.Threading;

class Program
{
    static Meter s_meter = new Meter("HatCo.HatStore", "1.0.0");
    static Counter<int> s_hatsSold = s_meter.CreateCounter<int>(name: "hats-sold", 
                                                                unit: "Hats",
                                                                description: "The number of hats sold in our store"); 

    static void Main(string[] args)
    {

>         MeterListener meterListener = new MeterListener();

Reviewer 2: >MeterListener meterListener = new MeterListener(); [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=8&length=50)

maybe can use 

```C#
using MeterListener meterListener = new MeterListener();
```

and remove `meterListener.Dispose();` at the end?

        meterListener.InstrumentPublished = (instrument, listener) =>
        {
            if(instrument.Meter.Name == "HatCo.HatStore")
            {
                listener.EnableMeasurementEvents(instrument);
            }
        };
        meterListener.SetMeasurementEventCallback<int>(OnMeasurementRecorded);
        meterListener.Start();

        Console.WriteLine("Press any key to exit");
        while(!Console.KeyAvailable)
        {
            // Pretend our store has a transaction each second that sells 4 hats
            Thread.Sleep(1000);
            s_hatsSold.Add(4);
        }

        meterListener.Dispose();
    }

>     static void OnMeasurementRecorded<T>(Instrument instrument, T measurement, ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string,object>> tags, object? state)

Reviewer 2: >T [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=38&length=1)

should we make this <int>?

Author: I was doing all my examples using 3.1 SDK where adding the `?` for nullability would create compiler warnings and I was attempting to avoid additional explanatory text/code to work around it. In many areas I know our new features are often coupled with users adopting new versions of the SDK/runtime but given our broad back-compat on DiagnosticSource I am guessing that the majority of users for this API are not yet using C# nullability analysis.

If you think it is likely to cause confusion we could still add some text about it though. Let me know your thoughts.

Author: I realized the `object? state` was already causing a nullability warning a missed somehow so I removed it for now to be consistent on not provided nullability markup.

Reviewer 2: Oh, my comment was not specific to nullability. I see my comment was malformed. sorry about that. My comment is to use `int` instead of `T` on this callback method? just to educate users using specific type would have a better perf. But I am ok too if you think using `T` is simpler for this example.

Author: Ah no worries Tarek. I'll stick with the T for now because I think it will let users extend the scenario more easily. I haven't measured, but as best I understand this isn't a case where the generics are creating perf overhead.

    {
        Console.WriteLine($"{instrument.Name} recorded measurement {measurement}");
    }
}
```

When run the application now runs our custom callback on each measurement:
```dotnetcli
> dotnet run
Press any key to exit
hats-sold recorded measurement 4
hats-sold recorded measurement 4
hats-sold recorded measurement 4
hats-sold recorded measurement 4
...
```

> Lets break down what happens in the example above. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's break down what happens in the example above. 
```

```C#

> using var meterListener = new MeterListener();

Reviewer 2: >using [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=0&length=5)

interesting, you already using it here :-)

Author: Yeah I was switching back and forth between the two approaches trying to get a better flow for the explanatory text. I wound up with inconsistent text : ) It should be consistent now as `using MeterListener meterListener = ...`

```
First we created an instance of the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> which we will use to receive measurements.

```C#
meterListener.InstrumentPublished = (instrument, listener) =>
{
    if(instrument.Meter.Name == "HatCo.HatStore")
    {
        listener.EnableMeasurementEvents(instrument);
    }
};
```

> Here we configured which instruments the listener will receive measurements from.

Reviewer: nit: add a white line above

<xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener.InstrumentPublished> is a delegate that will be invoked any time a new
instrument is created within the app. Our delegate can examine the instrument, such as checking the name, the Meter, or any other
public property to decide whether to subscribe. If we do want to receive measurements from this instrument then we invoke
<xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener.EnableMeasurementEvents> to indicate that. If your code has another way
to obtain a reference to an instrument it is legal to invoke EnableMeasurementEvents() at any time with that reference, but this is
probably uncommon.

```C#
meterListener.SetMeasurementEventCallback<int>(OnMeasurementRecorded);
...

> static void OnMeasurementRecorded<T>(Instrument instrument, T measurement, ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string,object>> tags, object? state)

Reviewer 2: >T [](http://example.com/codeflow?start=34&length=1)

If you decide to change this to `int` in the sample, you'll need to change it here too.

Author: I wanted to leave it as T because so that it easier for users to extend the sample with multiple calls to SetMeasurementEventCallback() on different data types. I expect only needing a single data type will be uncommon.

Reviewer 2: This is reply to my other comment :-) don't you think it would be better for the perf to use non generic type? I am ok to leave it as `T` but add a small comment the user can provide non generic type too which would be perform better?

Author: > don't you think it would be better for the perf to use non generic type?

In this case, no I don't expect there is a perf difference but I'll admit I didn't do benchmarking to confirm that I didn't overlook something. I'm not planning to go benchmark it now, but if someone else did that and it turns out I had it wrong I'm happy to change it.

{
    Console.WriteLine($"{instrument.Name} recorded measurement {measurement}");
}
```

> Next we configured the delegate that is invoked when measurements are received from an instrument by calling

Reviewer: nit: add an empty line above

recent .NET versions.

When MeterListener.EnableMeasurementEvents() was called initially there was an oportunity to provide a `state` object as
one of the parameters and that object can be anything you want. If you provide a state object in that call then it will be
stored with that instrument and returned to you as the `state` parameter in the callback. This is intended both as a
convenience and as a performance optimization. Often listeners need to create an object for each instrument that will
store measurements in memory and have code to do calculations on those measurements. Although you could create a Dictionary
that maps from the instrument to the storage object and look it up on every measurement that would be much slower than
accessing it from `state`.

```C#
meterListener.Start();
```
Once the MeterListener is configured we need to start it which triggers callbacks to begin. The InstrumentPublished 
delegate will be invoked for every pre-existing Instrument in the process. In the future any newly created Instrument
will also trigger InstrumentPublished to be created.

```C#

> meterListener.Dispose();

Reviewer 2: you have used `using ` when explaining the code here. we need to ensure we are consistent if we are using `using` or we manually calling `Dispose`

Author: The code and explanation should now be consistent on the 'using' pattern.

> ---

Author: Thanks! I updated the TOC so hopefully everything is covered now.

title: Collect metrics - .NET
description: Tutorial to collect metrics in .NET applications
ms.topic: tutorial
ms.date: 10/27/2021
---

# Collect metrics

**This article applies to: ✔️** .NET Core 3.1 and later versions **✔️** .NET Framework 4.6.1 and later versions

Instrumented code can record numeric measurements, but the measurements usually need to be aggregated, transmitted,
and stored to create useful metrics for monitoring. This process of aggregating, transmitting and storing the data is
called collection. In this tutorial, we will show several examples on how to collect metrics:

- Populating metrics in Grafana with OpenTelemetry and Prometheus
- Viewing metrics in real-time with the dotnet-counters command-line tool

> - Creating a custom collection tool using the underlying .NET <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> API

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Creating a custom collection tool using the underlying .NET <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> API.
```

For more information on custom metric instrumentation see [here](understanding-different-metric-apis.md) for an overview

> of instrumentation options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

<xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.Meter?displayProperty=nameWithType> API shown here.

```dotnetcli
dotnet new console
dotnet add package System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource
```

Replace the code of `Program.cs` with:

```C#
using System;
using System.Diagnostics.Metrics;
using System.Threading;

class Program
{
    static Meter s_meter = new Meter("HatCo.HatStore", "1.0.0");
    static Counter<int> s_hatsSold = s_meter.CreateCounter<int>("hats-sold"); 

    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        Console.WriteLine("Press any key to exit");
        while(!Console.KeyAvailable)
        {
            // Pretend our store has a transaction each second that sells 4 hats
            Thread.Sleep(1000);
            s_hatsSold.Add(4);
        }
    }
}
```

### Viewing metrics with dotnet-counters

[dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) is a simple command-line tool that can view live metrics for any .NET Core application on
demand. It doesn't require any advance setup which can make it very useful for ad-hoc investigations or to verify that metric
instrumentation is working correctly. It works with both <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics?displayProperty=nameWithType> based

> APIs as well as [EventCounters](event-counters.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
APIs and [EventCounters](event-counters.md).
```

> If the [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) tool is not already installed use the SDK to install it:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) tool is not already installed, use the SDK to install it:
```

```dotnetcli
> dotnet tool update -g dotnet-counters
You can invoke the tool using the following command: dotnet-counters
Tool 'dotnet-counters' (version '5.0.251802') was successfully installed.
```

> While the example app above is still running, list the running processes in a 2nd shell to determine the process ID:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the example app is still running, list the running processes in a second shell to determine the process ID:
```

```dotnetcli
> dotnet-counters ps
     10180 dotnet     C:\Program Files\dotnet\dotnet.exe
     19964 metric-instr E:\temp\metric-instr\bin\Debug\netcoreapp3.1\metric-instr.exe
```

Find the ID for the process name that matches the example app and have dotnet-counters monitor all metrics from the

> "HatCo.HatStore" Meter. Be careful, the meter name is case-sensitive.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
"HatCo.HatStore" meter. The meter name is case-sensitive.
```

    CPU Usage (%)                                                  0
    Exception Count (Count / 1 sec)                                0
    GC Heap Size (MB)                                              2
    Gen 0 GC Count (Count / 1 sec)                                 0
    Gen 0 Size (B)                                         2,216,256
    Gen 1 GC Count (Count / 1 sec)                                 0
    Gen 1 Size (B)                                           423,392
    Gen 2 GC Count (Count / 1 sec)                                 0
    Gen 2 Size (B)                                           203,248
    LOH Size (B)                                             933,216
    Monitor Lock Contention Count (Count / 1 sec)                  0
    Number of Active Timers                                        1
    Number of Assemblies Loaded                                   39
    ThreadPool Completed Work Item Count (Count / 1 sec)           0
    ThreadPool Queue Length                                        0
    ThreadPool Thread Count                                        3
    Working Set (MB)                                              30
```

> See the [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md) for more information about the tool or [builtin metrics](available-counters.md) to learn

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more information about the tool, see the [dotnet-counters](dotnet-counters.md).
```

> more about metrics that are available out of the box in .NET.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To learn more about metrics that are available out of the box in .NET, see [built-in metrics](available-counters.md).
```

### Viewing metrics in Grafana with OpenTelemetry and Prometheus

#### Prerequisites

- [.NET Core 3.1 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet) or a later version

#### Overview

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is a vendor-neutral open-source project supported by the
[Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/) that aims to standardize generating and collecting telemetry for

> cloud-native software. The .NET team has designed our built-in platform metric APIs to be compatible with this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cloud-native software. The built-in platform metric APIs are designed to be compatible with this
```

> standard to make integration straightforward for any .NET developers that wish to use it. At the time of writing support for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
standard to make integration straightforward for any .NET developers that wish to use it. At the time of writing, support for
```

> OpenTelemetry metrics is relatively new but [Azure Monitor](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/app/opentelemetry-overview)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry metrics is relatively new, but [Azure Monitor](/azure/azure-monitor/app/opentelemetry-overview)
```

and many major APM vendors have endorsed it and have integration plans underway.

This example shows one of the integrations available now for OpenTelemetry metrics using the very popular OSS
[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/) projects. The metrics data will flow like this:

1. The .NET metric APIs collect measurements from our example application.
2. The OpenTelemetry library running inside the same process aggregates these measurements.
3. The Prometheus exporter library makes the aggregated data available via an HTTP
metrics endpoint. 'Exporter' is what OpenTelemetry calls the libraries that transmit
telemetry to vendor-specific backends.
4. A Prometheus server, potentially running on a different machine, polls the

> metrics endpoint, reads the data and stores it in a database for long-term persistence.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
metrics endpoint, reads the data, and stores it in a database for long-term persistence.
```

                                                                description: "The number of hats sold in our store"); 

    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        using MeterProvider meterProvider = Sdk.CreateMeterProviderBuilder()
                .AddMeter("HatCo.HatStore")
                .AddPrometheusExporter(opt =>
                {
                    opt.StartHttpListener = true;
                    opt.HttpListenerPrefixes = new string[] { $"http://localhost:9184/" };
                })
                .Build();

        Console.WriteLine("Press any key to exit");
        while(!Console.KeyAvailable)
        {
            // Pretend our store has a transaction each second that sells 4 hats
            Thread.Sleep(1000);
            s_hatsSold.Add(4);
        }
    }
}
```

`AddMeter("HatCo.HatStore")` configures OpenTelemetry to transmit all the metrics collected by the Meter our app defined.
`AddPrometheusExporter(...)` configures OpenTelemetry to expose Prometheus' metrics endpoint on port 9184 and to use
the HttpListener. See the [OpenTelemetry documentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet/tree/main/src/OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Prometheus)

> for more information about OpenTelemetry configuration options, in particular alternate hosting options that are useful for ASP.NET applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
for more information about OpenTelemetry configuration options, in particular, alternative hosting options that are useful for ASP.NET applications.
```

> [!NOTE]
> At the time of writing OpenTelemetry only supports metrics emitted using the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics?displayProperty=nameWithType>

> > APIs however support for [EventCounters](event-counters.md) is planned.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> APIs; however, support for [EventCounters](event-counters.md) is planned.
```

Run the example app and leave it running in the background.

```dotnetcli
> dotnet run
Press any key to exit
```

> #### Setup and Configure Prometheus

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Set up and configure Prometheus
```

Follow the [Prometheus first steps](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/first_steps/) to set up your Prometheus server
and confirm it is working.

Modify the prometheus.yml configuration file so that Prometheus will scrape the metrics endpoint that our example app is
exposing. Add this text in the scrape_configs section:

```yaml
  - job_name: 'OpenTelemetryTest'
    scrape_interval: 1s # poll very quickly for a more responsive demo
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9184']
```

If you are starting from the default configuration then scrape_configs should now look like this:

```yaml
scrape_configs:
  # The job name is added as a label `job=<job_name>` to any timeseries scraped from this config.
  - job_name: "prometheus"

    # metrics_path defaults to '/metrics'
    # scheme defaults to 'http'.

    static_configs:
      - targets: ["localhost:9090"]

  - job_name: 'OpenTelemetryTest'
    scrape_interval: 1s # poll very quickly for a more responsive demo
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9184']
```

Reload the configuration or restart the Prometheus server, then confirm that OpenTelemetryTest is in the UP

> state in the Status->Targets page of the Prometheus web portal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
state in the **Status** > **Targets** page of the Prometheus web portal.
```

> On the Graph page of the Prometheus web portal enter `hats_sold` in the expression text box. In the graph tab Prometheus should

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the Graph page of the Prometheus web portal, enter `hats_sold` in the expression text box. In the graph tab, Prometheus should
```

show the steadily increasing value of the "hats-sold" Counter that is being emitted by our example application.
[![Prometheus hats sold graph](media/prometheus-hat-sold-metric.png)](media/prometheus-hat-sold-metric.png)

> If the Prometheus server hasn't been scraping the example app for long you may need to wait a short while for data to accumulate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the Prometheus server hasn't been scraping the example app for long, you may need to wait a short while for data to accumulate.
```

You can also adjust the time range control in the upper left to "1m" (1 minute) to get a better view of very recent data.

#### Showing metrics on a Grafana dashboard

1. Follow [the standard instructions](https://prometheus.io/docs/visualization/grafana/#creating-a-prometheus-graph) to install Grafana and
connect it to a Prometheus data source.

> 2. Create a Grafana dashboard by clicking the "+" icon on the left toolbar in the Grafana web portal, then select 'Dashboard'. In the dashboard

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Create a Grafana dashboard by clicking the **+** icon on the left toolbar in the Grafana web portal, then select **Dashboard**. In the dashboard
```

editor that appears enter 'Hats Sold/Sec' as the Title and 'rate(hats_sold[5m])' in the PromQL expression field. It should look like this:
[![Hats sold Grafana dashboard editor](media/grafana-hats-sold-dashboard-editor.png)](media/grafana-hats-sold-dashboard-editor.png)

> 3. Click Apply to save and view our simple new dashboard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Click **Apply** to save and view the simple new dashboard.
```

[![Hats sold Grafana dashboard](media/grafana-hats-sold-dashboard.png)](media/grafana-hats-sold-dashboard.png)

### Creating a custom collection tool using the .NET <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> API

The .NET <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> API allows creating custom in-process logic to observe the measurements
being recorded by <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.Meter?displayProperty=nameWithType>. For guidance creating custom

> logic compatible with the older EventCounters instrumentation see [here](event-counters.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
logic compatible with the older EventCounters instrumentation, see [EventCounters](event-counters.md).
```

                                                                unit: "Hats",
                                                                description: "The number of hats sold in our store"); 

    static void Main(string[] args)
    {
        using MeterListener meterListener = new MeterListener();
        meterListener.InstrumentPublished = (instrument, listener) =>
        {
            if(instrument.Meter.Name == "HatCo.HatStore")
            {
                listener.EnableMeasurementEvents(instrument);
            }
        };
        meterListener.SetMeasurementEventCallback<int>(OnMeasurementRecorded);
        meterListener.Start();

        Console.WriteLine("Press any key to exit");
        while(!Console.KeyAvailable)
        {
            // Pretend our store has a transaction each second that sells 4 hats
            Thread.Sleep(1000);
            s_hatsSold.Add(4);
        }
    }

    static void OnMeasurementRecorded<T>(Instrument instrument, T measurement, ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string,object>> tags, object state)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"{instrument.Name} recorded measurement {measurement}");
    }
}
```

> When run the application now runs our custom callback on each measurement:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When run, the application now runs our custom callback on each measurement:
```

```dotnetcli
> dotnet run
Press any key to exit
hats-sold recorded measurement 4
hats-sold recorded measurement 4
hats-sold recorded measurement 4
hats-sold recorded measurement 4
...
```

Let's break down what happens in the example above.

```C#
using MeterListener meterListener = new MeterListener();
```

> First we created an instance of the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener> which we will use to receive measurements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First we created an instance of the <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener>, which we will use to receive measurements.
```

```C#
meterListener.InstrumentPublished = (instrument, listener) =>
{
    if(instrument.Meter.Name == "HatCo.HatStore")
    {
        listener.EnableMeasurementEvents(instrument);
    }
};
```

Here we configured which instruments the listener will receive measurements from.
<xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener.InstrumentPublished> is a delegate that will be invoked any time a new
instrument is created within the app. Our delegate can examine the instrument, such as checking the name, the Meter, or any other

> public property to decide whether to subscribe. If we do want to receive measurements from this instrument then we invoke

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
public property to decide whether to subscribe. If we do want to receive measurements from this instrument, then we invoke
```

<xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener.EnableMeasurementEvents%2A> to indicate that. If your code has another way

> to obtain a reference to an instrument it is legal to invoke EnableMeasurementEvents() at any time with that reference, but this is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to obtain a reference to an instrument, it's legal to invoke `EnableMeasurementEvents()` at any time with that reference, but this is
```

probably uncommon.

```C#
meterListener.SetMeasurementEventCallback<int>(OnMeasurementRecorded);
...
static void OnMeasurementRecorded<T>(Instrument instrument, T measurement, ReadOnlySpan<KeyValuePair<string,object>> tags, object state)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"{instrument.Name} recorded measurement {measurement}");
}
```

Next we configured the delegate that is invoked when measurements are received from an instrument by calling
<xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.MeterListener.SetMeasurementEventCallback%2A>. The generic parameter controls which data type
of measurement will be received by the callback. For example a `Counter<int>` generates `int` measurements whereas a

> `Counter<double>` will generate `double` measurements. Instruments are allowed to be created with `byte`, `short`, `int`, `long`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Counter<double>` generates `double` measurements. Instruments are allowed to be created with `byte`, `short`, `int`, `long`,
```

`float`, `double`, and `decimal` types. We recommend registering a callback for every data type unless you have scenario
specific knowledge that not all data types will be needed, such as in this example. Making repeated calls to
SetMeasurementEventCallback() with different generic arguments may appear a little unusual. The API is designed this way

> to allow MeterListeners to receive measurements with extremely low performance overhead, typically just a few ns on the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to allow MeterListeners to receive measurements with extremely low performance overhead, typically just a few nanoseconds.
```

> recent .NET versions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> When MeterListener.EnableMeasurementEvents() was called initially there was an oportunity to provide a `state` object as

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When MeterListener.EnableMeasurementEvents() was called initially, there was an opportunity to provide a `state` object as
```

> one of the parameters and that object can be anything you want. If you provide a state object in that call then it will be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
one of the parameters. That object can be anything you want. If you provide a state object in that call, then it will be
```

stored with that instrument and returned to you as the `state` parameter in the callback. This is intended both as a
convenience and as a performance optimization. Often listeners need to create an object for each instrument that will
store measurements in memory and have code to do calculations on those measurements. Although you could create a Dictionary

> that maps from the instrument to the storage object and look it up on every measurement that would be much slower than

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that maps from the instrument to the storage object and look it up on every measurement, that would be much slower than
```

accessing it from `state`.

```C#
meterListener.Start();
```

> Once the MeterListener is configured we need to start it which triggers callbacks to begin. The InstrumentPublished

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the `MeterListener` is configured, we need to start it to trigger callbacks to begin. The `InstrumentPublished`
```

> delegate will be invoked for every pre-existing Instrument in the process. In the future any newly created Instrument

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
delegate will be invoked for every pre-existing Instrument in the process. In the future, any newly created Instrument
```

> will also trigger InstrumentPublished to be created.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
will also trigger `InstrumentPublished` to be invoked.
```

```C#
using MeterListener meterListener = new MeterListener();
```

Once we are done listening, disposing the listener stops the flow of callbacks and releases any internal references
to the listener object. The `using` keyword we used when declaring `meterListener` causes Dispose() to be called automatically

> when the variable goes out of scope. Be wary that Dispose() is only promising that it won't initiate new callbacks. Because callbacks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
when the variable goes out of scope. Be aware that `Dispose()` is only promising that it won't initiate new callbacks. Because callbacks
```

> occur on different threads there may still be callbacks in progress after the call to Dispose() returns. If you need a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
occur on different threads, there may still be callbacks in progress after the call to `Dispose()` returns. If you need a
```

> guarantee that a certain region of code in your callback isn't currently executing and will never execute again in the future

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
guarantee that a certain region of code in your callback isn't currently executing and will never execute again in the future,
```

> then you will need some additional thread synchronization to enforce that. Dispose() doesn't include the synchronization

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
then you will need some additional thread synchronization to enforce that. `Dispose()` doesn't include the synchronization
```

> by default because it adds performance overhead in every measurement callback and MeterListener is designed as a very

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
by default because it adds performance overhead in every measurement callback&mdash;and `MeterListener` is designed as a highly
```
